However, it is precisely the contribution of Physical Geodesy to
Geophysics in general, to show how one can determine V from the Laplace equation
(1.40), from observations performed on S or in ˝ (e.g., satellite observations) and
maybe from some knowledge of  in the uppermost layer of the earth, namely the
crust. In other words we aim at determining V without a detailed knowledge of ,
so that the outcome of physical geodesy puts constraints on the theory of the earth
constitution and its dynamics, rather than viceversa.

Completely different in nature is the definition of the so-called orthometric
height; this is in fact the length of the plumb-line arc between the point P and
its projection P0 on G, counted positively upward (see Fig. 1.11).


As intuitive as it is, yet the orthometric height is a quantity that cannot be easily
related analytically to observables, in particular considering that since G is always
chosen so as to be close to the mean surface of the oceans, then it is most of the
times buried in the masses, in correspondence to continental areas. As we shall see
later on, H can be approximately determined only if we assume to know as well
the density of mass above G. We warn the reader however that several nations have
switched from using orthometric heights to other height systems that don’t require,
according to Molodensky’s theory, any knowledge of mass density.


Indeed if we knew exactly the mass density, .Q/, we would have a little need
of physical geodesy, in fact physical geodesy is precisely the science of how to deal
with the gravity field without knowing .

Generally speaking a global model of the gravity field anomalous potential T .P /,
or global geopotential model, is a finite linear combination of functions Hm.P / that
are regular harmonic on S and in the whole outer space ˝

- Geoid Determination have a good resource about the resolution in page 167


Summarizing the results of Chap. 3, we could say that up to now we have learnt how
to produce an approximate anomalous potential in the form of a truncated series of
spherical or ellipsoidal harmonics, namely a global potential model.
Now we focus on the other side of the spectrum of T , namely the very highfrequency components. The purposes of the Chapter are: (1) to clarify that if
we want to determine the gravity field and the geoid with an appropriate spatial
resolution, for instance on a 1 km by 1 km grid on the earth surface, we need then
a detailed model of the geometry of the surface, i.e. a digital terrain model (DTM)
with say a 100 m horizontal resolution. This because we will never be able to reach
this resolution with ground gravity measurements covering the whole earth surface,
while a proper DTM can be and has been derived by satellite observations, (2)
to clarify that most of the high-frequency part of the potential T comes exactly
from the shape of the masses modelled by the topographic surface, because highfrequency signals from internal density variations (e.g. those due to the topography
of core-mantle boundary) are naturally strongly smoothed by the harmonic upward
continuation, (3) to find the proper analytical computable expression of the potential
due to topographic masses (on such matters one can consult Forsberg 1988, 2008,
2010).