Current knowledge of the Earth's gravity field and its geoid, as derived from various observing techniques and sources, is incomplete. Within a reasonable time, substantial improvements can only come by exploiting new approaches based on satellite gravity observation methods.

On land and ice sheets, the difference between ellipsoidal heights (as measured by the Global
Positioning System (GPS)) and the geoid obtained from GOCE gives ‘pseudo- levelled’ or
orthometric heights. This differentiation opens the prospect of an extremely efficient and
accurate method of height determination for science, mapping and engineering. In addition, all
existing height systems could be transferred to one global reference level. This, as well as the
additional benefits of a global, accurate and detailed knowledge of the Earth’s gravity field, e.g.
for orbit determination and inertial navigation


Neither of the above three data sources nor their combination can meet the
requirements from solid-Earth physics, oceanography and geodesy, not even to a limited extent.
This is why one can say with good reason that “... the gravity field over land areas on Earth is
less well known than is that of Venus” (McKenzie, 1994). The solution must therefore come
from dedicated gravity field mapping by satellite.


As explained above, the traditional techniques of gravity field determination have reached their
intrinsic limits. Any advances must rely on space techniques because only they provide global,
regular and dense data sets of high and homogeneous quality. It may seem almost paradoxical to
obtain the measurements from several hundreds of kilometres up in space, away from the
attracting mass anomalies, which one would like to identify and discriminate


The traditional, very cumbersome and slow, technique of height determination
is by means of geodetic levelling in combination with gravimetry. All developed countries have
an ongoing programme of maintenance of large and dense systems of benchmarks with height
values produced in this manner for scientific and applied users. Geodetic levelling attains
mm-precision over smaller distances, but is subject to systematic distortions on continental
scales. It is this latter weakness that severely limits the comparison and connection of height
systems used in neighbouring countries or, for example, of tide gauges located on distant coasts.
Separation of land areas by sea inevitably leads to large discontinuities between height systems.

A global geoid of 1 cm accuracy at about 100 km spatial resolution and a gravity field model
with 1-2 mgal precision accuracy and the same spatial resolution would serve four major
objectives in geodesy:
– control or replacement of traditional levelling by ‘levelling with GPS’ – unification of height
systems worldwide so as to refer to one height datum which will allow, for example, comparison
of sea-level and sea-level changes in the North Sea with those in the Mediterranean
– separation of gravity acceleration from vehicle acceleration in inertial
navigation – elimination of gravitational uncertainty from satellite orbit trajectories.


Levelling by GPS: In a similar way as ocean altimetry combined with the geoid determines
dynamic ocean topography, the combination of GPS and geoid determines land topography and
topographic heights (Schwarz and Sideris, 1987 or Rummel, 1992). In other words, with the aid
of geoid heights above an adopted ellipsoid, geometric heights above this ellipsoid, as
determined by GPS or any follow-on system, are convertible to heights above sea-level. The
latter are denoted ‘orthometric Unification of height systems: There are still a large number of unconnected height systems
around the World. Each system refers to a reference point, usually a benchmark close to the sea
and connected by levelling to mean sea-level obtained by tide gauge. The discontinuity in height systems is of no importance as long as there is no requirement to compare height values from the various systems. In the past, discontinuities had to be accepted whenever different geographical areas (with their individual height system) are separated by sea. With the geoid precision to be achieved by GOCE, it will be possible to connect all height systems with cm-precision, provided at least one benchmark in each height
system is equipped with precision space positioning such as GPS 


Therefore,
GOCE will, for example, (1) bring all sea-level recordings into one system, (2) eliminate height
discontinuities between adjacent islands, and (3) allow the removal of existing biases in
terrestrial-gravity-anomaly data sets.



~goce_sp1233_1.pdf
